---
layout: post
name: zig
title: PicoLisp FFI with Zig
---

You can [get it on GitHub](https://github.com/aw/picolisp-zig).

This repo provides a simple example of how to use [PicoLisp](https://software-lab.de/down.html) with [Zig](https://ziglang.org/download/) using PicoLisp's FFI `(native)` functionality.

This is similar to [picolisp-rust](https://github.com/aw/picolisp-rust) except written for _Zig_.

# Requirements

  * Zig `v0.6+`
  * PicoLisp 64-bit `v17.12+` or `pil21`

# Getting started

Once you've setup _PicoLisp_ and _Zig_, simply type `make` to build and test the shared library.

# Output

Before I explain what's going on, here's what the output should look like:

```
Received struct: pil.PilStruct{ .byte1 = 32, .byte2 = 33, .character1 = 67, .character2 = 68, .int = -1, .long = 1, .string = u8@4847464544434241, .array = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 } }
Result code: 0
Extracted struct: 
(de Extracted (42 43)
   ("A" "B")
   65535
   9223372036854775807
   "pilzig"
   (80 105 99 111 76 105 115 112) )
```

# Explain

The code can be found in [extract.l](extract.l) and [pil.zig](pil.zig). The _Zig_ code is designed as a **shared library** and can be called by PicoLisp's **(native)** function to pass data to/from between both languages.

## PicoLisp code explanation

First, the code allocates 32 bytes of memory, which will be used to store data in a [struct](https://software-lab.de/doc/refS.html#struct).

It then creates a struct named `P` with the following specification:

  * 2 arbitrary bytes
  * 2-bytes containing valid UTF-8 characters
  * 1x 32-bit (4 bytes) signed integer
  * 1x 64-bit (8 bytes) signed long
  * 1x 8-byte null-terminated string
  * 1x 8-byte arbitrary bytes array

Then the following [native](https://software-lab.de/doc/refN.html#native) call is made and its result is stored in the `Res` variable:

```picolisp
(native "./libpil.so" "extract" 'I P)
```

This calls the `extract` function from the _Zig_ library, with the `P` struct as its only parameter. It expects a 32-bit signed integer `I` as the return value (it will be either `0` or `-1`).

Next, the code will extract the `P` structure using the specification described above:

```
(struct P '((B . 2) (C . 2) I N S (B . 8)))
```

Finally, the code will free the previously allocated memory and print the result of the `P` structure.

Some tests run at the end to ensure the data received from _Zig_ is what we expected.

### Note

  * The values sent to the _Zig_ library will be printed by _Zig_ as `Received struct:`.
  * The values received from the _Zig_ library will be printed by _PicoLisp_ as `Extracted struct:`.

## Zig code explanation

The _Zig_ code defines the struct for the received data; it is named `PilStruct` and contains the exact same specification as the `P` struct in the _PicoLisp code explanation_.

The `extract()` function creates a new struct in the variable `newstruct` which contains some new values, different from what was received by _PicoLisp_.

Luckily, the _Zig_ pointers [cannot be **null**](https://ziglang.org/learn/overview/#optional-type-instead-of-null-pointers) so there's no need to check for that.

The code then dereferences the pointer and prints what it received (the entire struct) from _PicoLisp_ as `Received struct:` (mentioned earlier).

Finally, it writes the `newstruct` struct to the pointer and returns `0`. _PicoLisp_ can then read the return code and the new struct data.

# Thoughts

There isn't much to this code, but I thought it would be fun to create a working FFI library that's _not_ written in _C_ or _Rust_ and which works perfectly with _PicoLisp_.
